Redwood Drive at Alder Point. Blue Star Gas provides propane and gas appliances throughout
southern Humboldt, northern Mendocino, and Trinity counties, locally owned and independent
since 1938. And, support for Redwood Community Radio comes in part from the Security Store
Inc. in the Meadows Business Park in Redway, featuring watershed dry bags and pelican cases
in many sizes. Both have lifetime warranties and have been tested over time in Humboldt
County. The Security Store has solutions for all security needs and is open Monday through
Saturday 9-5pm and their number is 923-2363. And, you are listening to, this is Redwood
Community Radio, KMUD Garberville 91.1 FM and HD 1, KMUE Eureka 88.1 FM and HD 1, or
you may be listening to us on KLAI Laytonville at 90.3 FM. You may also be listening to us
on the web at KMUD.org. And, if you are in Shelter Cove out there, you might be listening
to FM Translator K258BQ Shelter Cove at 99.5 FM. And, that's who we are. This is KMUD and
it's about 7-01 and we're going to go to Ask Your Herb Doctor very shortly. So, please
stay tuned.
[Music]
Hi and good evening to this month's Ask Your Herb Doctor. My name's Andrew Murray. For
those of you who perhaps have never listened to our shows which run every third Friday
of the month from 7-8pm, I'm a licensed medical herbalist who trained in England and graduated
there with a Master's Degree in Herbal Medicine. I run a clinic in Garberville where I consult
with clients about a wide range of conditions and recommend herbal medicine and dietary
advice. So, you're listening to Ask Your Herb Doctor on KMUD Garberville, 91.1 FM. And,
from 7.30 until the end of the show at 8 o'clock, you're invited to call in with any questions
either related or unrelated to this month's subject, an ongoing subject perhaps, of the
use of urea in the treatment of various pathologies. We're also going to get into a recapitulation
if you like about isoflavones, soy products, etc. Things that are touted as being healthful
and where the mistakes have come from because I know Dr. Pete has at length discussed various
of these subjects and there is no science behind it, but unfortunately they're still
portrayed in the mainstream as very healthful along with the fish oil. So, we're going to
get into that later on after the topic of urea in the treatment of disease. For those
of you who are calling outside the area, the show is live and from 7.30 until 8 o'clock
we take callers who'd like to pose questions to Dr. Pete either related to this month's
subject or if indeed they have other questions health-related that they'd like to ask Dr.
Pete, then they're also welcome to do that. So, the number if they live outside the area,
the toll-free number is 1-800-KMUD-RAD which is 1-800-568-3723. For those in the local
area, the 707 area code at least, the number is 923-3911. And I can be reached toll-free
on 1-888-WBM-ERB for consultations or any other further information Monday through Friday,
regular business hours. Okay, so Dr. Pete, are you with us?
Yes. Oh, hi. Thanks for joining us.
So, again as always, perhaps for those people who might have just tuned in for the first
time or for people that may have only heard of you once or twice as well as those who
are regular listeners to your show, would you just discuss your professional and academic
background and how it's brought you to where you're at now?
I don't really have a professional background, I guess, but academically I studied various
things for an MA in humanities and then 1968 to '72 I got a PhD in biology specializing
in reproductive physiology and the biochemistry related to it. But I've been talking to lots
of people about biological ideas for about 50 years, so my education comes in a lot of
non-academic ways. Okay, so I know that you're constantly researching
both old as well as novel breakthroughs in the interpretation of disease and the approach
to disease which is less than mainstream medical approaches because the science very often
has a different perspective to which I think most people are subject in medicine per se.
That is to say, I think sometimes the truth of trials and research that's done isn't always
brought out to the public, certainly not in a timely manner. Maybe 20 or 30 years later
we begin to see the revelations from that initial research and it comes to the attention
of people a bit like the U-turn, if you like, on the polyunsaturated oils that now are recognized
as being negative for a person's health rather than the financially viable positive health
benefits. So I think for this month, we talked about it a little while ago, last month or
in December's show, about the treatment of urea in cancer, specifically with reference
to a Dr. Evangelos Danopoulos, a Greek medical doctor who actually was, I think he was conferred
an honorary professorship. I think they know him now on the internet as Professor Danopoulos.
But ultimately, he published quite a few peer-reviewed papers in respective medical
journals, those being things like The Lancet and in the journal Clinical Oncology, one
particularly I know we're probably going to quote from, or you're probably going to quote
from too, that were published in 1983 and he did some research prior to that in the
late 70s. So some of the questions on urea and how a simple compound like urea that's
totally non-toxic, extremely inexpensive and very well tolerated by all the people that
were using it and people that use it per se around the world for various things from skin
conditions to these cancers that we'll talk about. What are your interpretations of the
mechanism by which urea is affecting this anti-cancer activity? And then we'll get into
some of the outright experiments that were done.
I think one of the essential things is that it inhibits nitric oxide formation. And nitric
oxide formation is probably the main means by which stress of any kind can turn off oxidative
energy production. And so anything that will turn off nitric oxide excess will restore
energy production and restoring energy production has all kinds of even structural ramifications.
The constant consumption of oxygen is maintaining and renewing the microscopic structure of
a cell. The membrane, people about 50 years ago were arguing that the membrane is semi-permeable
and it has to have pumps and cell energy has to run those pumps. But in fact, there are
no demonstrated pumps and the pumps that they postulated would take many times more energy
than the cell could ever produce. So the cell is doing something with its energy very different
from maintaining an osmotic balance. It's maintaining the structure in an atomically
fine sense structure right down to the electronic relations of atoms to each other. And it's
this kind of balance that urea participates in directly as well as helping to prevent
the loss of the oxidative production of energy. So the energy produces this structure which
has all of the properties of life and urea fits into that in a unique way so that the
normal amount in the blood is just a few milligrams per 100 cc's of blood. But you can increase
that to 1000 milligrams per to 100, almost 1% of the blood without disturbing things
physiologically. And DeNopolis found that when he got the blood level up to at least
85 milligrams per cent, more than 10 times the normal amount, the cancers would start
disappearing. And so it's a matter of concentration. Even before that concentration, it will have
shut down the production and action of nitric oxide. But then it has these structure stabilizing
effects. It fits right into the way water is structured and it increases the ability
of the cell's natural hormones to structure the water and protein system the way the cell
wants to structure it. So it's like urea is supporting what the cell wants to do, even
when it's at these extremely high concentrations.
So it's a little bit similar to the electronic state structuring water when we talk about
structured water that you think
Yeah, it's exactly what the oxidative system is doing to the electrons. It's preventing
an excess of electrons and toxins and carcinogens and radiation are doing exactly the opposite.
They're putting too many loose electrons into the wrong places.
Right. So and this and this by your description of too many loose electrons, we can imagine
those as being what they call the damaging free radicals and things like
that. Even more extensive than that, it's the chemical system of the proteins contains
a lot of sulfhydryl compounds, glutathione that a lot of doctors are using intravenously
as an anti stress thing. This is a sulfur compound maintained by energy rich fuel molecules,
and it maintains a certain degree of oxidation in balance with sulfhydryl groups attached
to the proteins and the proteins are in there like a reservoir of electrons at the right
energy level and the oxygen metabolism besides providing ATP and other forms of energy is
preventing an overflow of loose electrons getting into the structure of the proteins.
Too many electrons will de differentiate the cell move towards non oxidative energy production
and the formation of lactic acid which can start vicious circles.
Right. Okay, because I know I read a several abstracts of that old. Yeah. Published pieces
of work done with various groups of people with cancers. I know he worked on liver cancer
was something I believe I believe we brought out two months ago. The treatment and approach
to liver cancer with urea. I know he worked a lot with people that had liver primaries
and or secondaries, but the ocular cancers, the cancers of the eye, the melanomas and
the basal cell carcinomas. That was pretty interesting the way urea again was used in
the treatment of those ocular cancers and his articles on that have photographs that
show very vividly the correction, the elimination of the cancer and restoration of normal tissue.
And one of the interesting things about urea is that at these very high concentrations,
it is so stabilizing to normal tissue that it prevents the formation of deforming scars.
In a 1935 publication, someone was describing its use in treating wounds of all kinds, packing
crystals right into the wound or the ulcer or whatever was an open damage to the organism,
putting the solid urea into it and leaving it would clear up the infection and stimulate
healing but it would heal without visible scarring.
I read that it promoted a fairly rapid granulation tissue in the wounds and that was part of
its part of its mechanism by which it achieved such good wound healing.
I was seeing a story about an African spiny mouse that can regenerate its tissue very
quickly like they mentioned that punching a hole in the skin, it could close the wound
by almost two-thirds in the first day. In three or four days, the wound would be healed
without a scar.
Now this I think from an energy perspective is quite interesting. It's a bit of a sidetrack
from the subject but young children and young adults, they heal rapidly compared to older
people and that's got to be down to an electronic energy state within the organism, correct?
Yeah, the oxidative metabolism slows down from early in embryonic development down to
old age. There's a steady decrease of oxidative metabolism.
Yeah, it's the downfall of all of us who are gradually aging. Okay, so in order to, very
quickly again, in order to stave off that kind of electronic degradation and the inability
to oxidatively repair, what do you think are some of the best tactics that people can use
to maintain the ability to stave off that damage?
In the uterus, the developing embryo also heals without scarring. I think two factors
are involved in that. The high carbon dioxide level and the higher urea and related compounds
in the amniotic fluid. In the adult also, just pure carbon dioxide gas can be blown
into an ulcer and stimulate healing, control other symptoms, reduce pain and so on. But
I think as soon as an organism is born, it starts interacting with the outside environment
where in the uterus it was getting its energy filtered through the placenta and making its
own fats out of the glucose and fructose that were provided to it. And the organism using
carbohydrate for energy produces saturated fats or omega minus nine unsaturated fats.
And when we come into the world, we're exposed to the fats produced by organisms living at
a lower temperature generally. And the colder a plant is exposed to, the more unsaturated
its fats are and they're of a different type than we would make ourselves. And those interrupt
our oxidative metabolism to the extent that we become saturated with them. And that happens
progressively from the time we're born in the old age generally.
Okay. Well, welcome to this month's Ask Your Herb Doctor. Again, we're very proud to have
Dr. Pete sharing his expertise with us on the show. From 730 to 8 o'clock, you're invited
to call in with any questions either related or unrelated to this month's subject of urea
and the treatment of cancers with urea. And then in a bit here, we're going to get into
some of the mistaken lies, in fact, maybe even purposeful lies that are portrayed in
the media from various supplement companies and big industry related to estrogen and bone
health and cancers and phytoestrogens role in that. So if you live in the area, the number
is 9233911. Or there's a toll free number if you live outside the area. That's 1-800-568-3723.
So Dr. Pete, just going back to Dr. Danopoulos' work with cancer, he had several, quite a
few cases actually of cancers that were completely healed. And I just find it so shocking when
here is scientific evidence peer reviewed in scientific magazines that are portraying
various other experiments from drug companies and/or individual research from universities
that showed what happened. And I just find it hard to believe that this kind of thing
doesn't perpetuate itself and become common knowledge to a point where it's actually taken
up by academic institutes and made more viable.
The medical journals depend on the pharmaceutical industry largely. And urea that sells for
a couple dollars a pound or something isn't a very good drug, especially a drug that cures
isn't a good drug, even if it's expensive. A cheap drug that cures just won't work in
the medical system.
I mean I wanted to bring these out just for those people that are listening. I think we
all have free choice. And to find information out for ourselves is always a good idea rather
than just listening to whatever it is that we're being told by whoever it is that's telling
us. It's always very good I think, especially in the age of the internet where I know there's
lots of bad information on the internet, it's not to say it's all good, but there's lots
of places where you can go and you can read scientific medical information that you know
is being researched and you know it's been pretty well scrutinized. And when it's telling
you that this kind of thing is being used to treat a cancer, it's very hard to ignore
it.
So I think just for those people that are listening perhaps, they might want to look
at Dr. Danopoulos' work in the late 70s and the early 80s and his approach to the treatment
of liver disease with urea as well as cancers of the eye. And then I think the other thing
I wanted to get into was just some of the amounts of the product. And as we've already
mentioned, urea is extremely non-toxic. It's kind of odourless and tasteless and doesn't
really have anything negative going for it. It's very well tolerated. So I know some of
the instances where he's quoting case histories here, we're using something like 15, I don't
know, one of the quotes was 15 grams of urea in a quart of water. And this was to be drunk
daily. So this was just a total amount of urea to be consumed every hour or so, you
know, in the waking hour from, I don't know, from 9 or 10 o'clock through till 6 or 7 in
the afternoon. So 15 grams of urea and then there were injections that were done with
a 15, up to 50, between 15 and 50%. I think the average was kind of a 20, 25% urea solution
for skin tumors and that was found to be highly effective. And then I know he mentions, and
this is a little bit different, I think here in the States we use blood urea and nitrogen,
but he was quoting blood urea as a level and quoting 75 to 85 milligrams per cent. So do
you know roughly what that would equate to, 75 to 85 milligrams per cent? That would be?
I think it requires taking quite a bit more than 15 grams per day. Some of the studies
were using up to 120 grams per day divided up in doses of about 15 grams at a time.
Interesting.
And in the 1950s, it was probably the main treatment used for brain swelling, reducing
brain edema because a lot of people were thinking of it as an osmotic treatment and it was
displaced by various osmotic substances with the idea that you would make the blood hyperosmotic
to draw the excess water out of the brain into the blood. But urea isn't osmotically
active because it goes right into the cells and to be osmotically active has to be like
sodium that stays outside the cell or like sucrose or some of the sugars that can't be
absorbed. But urea goes into the cell, sort of soothes the cell's excitation, changes
its electronic balance and lets the cell excrete, give up the water that it doesn't need, very
much the way progesterone and thyroid work, adjusting the electronic state so that the
ion exchange system and electronic affinity for water is downgraded so that it doesn't
bind so much water.
That same anti-edema effect is still here and there used for treating congestive heart
failure. I was looking up the Mexican pharmacopeia and I see that they still list urea to treat
the edema of heart failure because it's a diuretic that makes the kidneys work better.
It also causes the muscles and other organs to not retain water so greedily.
Okay, so you said again, just to quote you again, up to 120 grams a day you're saying?
Yeah, for getting rid of excess water. That was the amount they used.
And then you also mentioned in conjunction with urea therapy a compound called creatine
hydrate and saying that the two of these compounds together was even more effective at treating
these cancers than the urea alone. Do you know much about creatine hydrate?
No, I think it's probably having some of the physical effects similar to urea but it also
enters into the energy storage and management system.
Right, okay. Alright, so for those of you who are listening, like I said, you can look
on the internet, type in "Doctor or Professor Evangelos Danopoulos" and you can read all
about his work with liver cancer, eye cancers and other skin cancers with the treatment
of urea. So it might well be worth some people who have a compunction to do it to take a
look.
The other thing that caught my attention here, and I don't know, it sounds kind of incredible
and I don't mean to sound like I'm laughing but it's just a bit like the cancer thing.
It's just hard to imagine that these things can go by and not make a big dent or a big
impact because the next statement was the common white and brown mushrooms and we're
going to get into aromatase and breast cancer in a bit here with the discussion on isoflavones
and soy and why what they tell you is not the truth actually and this is the fact. But
the use of white and brown mushrooms to inhibit aromatase and prevent breast cell proliferation.
They were talking about 10 grams of mushroom a day. Presumably this is cooked now because
I know you've mentioned that regular white mushrooms and brown mushrooms actually contain
a fairly carcinogenic compound but 10 grams of cooked mushrooms a day reduce breast cancer
by 64% and then with the addition of a daily gram of green tea leaves, which we probably,
all those health conscious people have probably heard about the antioxidant benefits of green
tea, with the addition of a single gram of green tea leaves they got up to 89% reduction
in breast cancer. I find that incredible.
Yeah, you would think that there would be more news about that.
Okay, anyway, so that's a couple of things that I wanted to bring out. We do have a couple
of people I think waiting to take questions so the engineer here I think he's going to
be passing those people on to us here any minute. Yeah, so I think we have a caller
here. You're on the air and where are you from?
This is David from Missouri.
Oh, hey David. What's your question?
Well, you know, when you were talking about urea, it seems like through the years I've
read about indigenous people around the world actually using urine products for medicinal
purposes. Do you think why they intuitively knew that somehow that was the urea within
the urine?
Yeah, I would.
Because it had healing properties, you know, and because those people are probably in a
much cleaner environment, it could be possibly safe.
Dr. Peet, do you think there's anything to be said for the supposed sterility here of
urine given that you don't have a urinary tract infection, but its sterility and the
high concentration of urea in urine?
Yeah, I've known quite a few people who did it regularly and it seemed extremely healthy.
It's been, the Chinese used it for example, and one of their interpretations was that
it was the steroids. They concentrated things like the metabolites of progesterone and pregnenolone
from the urine and used these to extend the lives of the kings and rich people.
Interesting.
Interesting, huh? Well, and Dr. Peet, do you, you know, the main things that you promote,
you know, eating saturated fat, getting plenty of sunlight and a certain level of CO2, I'm
not sure exactly how to ask this, but if we were to work backwards on the physiology of
the human body, it appears that evolution of humanity occurred in equatorial areas and
possibly in more high altitude areas. And I guess the warm climate would also be that
you would probably be eating more saturated fat in plants and maybe in animals? Would
that be a, if somebody were to, you know, take your philosophy seriously and start doing
studies based on that idea, do you think they would find that that is how man evolved and
that moving away from the equator is where a lot of the problems are occurring for the
human organism?
Yeah, that's my orientation on the issue of origins. High altitude, warm climate, lots
of fruit and all foods would be more saturated in a more equatorial environment.
Do you think in general that people that are studying science know that that is the case
or probably not because they're not warning us about polyunsaturated fats and they're
not telling us we need more sunlight and they must be oblivious to that, I guess.
I ran across publications in some of the fairly well-known food journals 40, 50 years ago
showing that the fats vary with the climate and that the fats have a definite function.
Some of them are functioning to protect the plants against animal predators by poisoning
them so they put lots of the unsaturated fats in their seeds. That was recognized 40 years
ago that the seed oils are biological defense.
It almost seems like if somebody kept in their mind that, you know, we did evolve from an
equatorial area and that we do need lots of sunlight and we do need certain types of food,
they could actually kind of guide you. It's like so many people just don't get it that
they're not getting enough sunlight when they're further north. It's almost like if they were
reminded that your organism actually is adapted to an equatorial situation that they would
think more about that, you know?
And previously when it was summer in the high latitudes, people were outside farming, herding
the sheep or whatever, getting lots of sunlight exposure. And in the last hundred years, people
have sort of moved indoors and gotten sicker, I think largely from deficiency of sunlight.
I don't want to interrupt too much here, but we do have three other callers on the line,
so I just want to be fair to make sure everyone gets a fair chance.
Okay, thank you.
Yeah, thank you for your question and thank you, Dr. Peete. Let's move on to the next
person so the other two get a chance. Next caller, you're on the air. And where are you
from?
From Arcata, California.
Okay, yeah, go ahead. What's your question?
You were going to talk about fish oil, and I've taken fish oil and I'm hearing that you
were going to talk about the negative effect, that it's not all correct.
Yeah, it's unfortunate for you that the research that's out there does not make it to the popular
mainstream as quickly as it would be good if it did. It's certainly taking a U-turn
now. I know, Dr. Peete, you spent quite a lot of your life researching the polyunsaturates
and how damaging they are. If you want to briefly give the gentleman caller a synopsis
of the polyunsaturated, especially the fish oil and how damaging it is for you, I think
it would be good for him to hear that.
The majority of the oils that we store are unsaturated. Our cells prefer to oxidize saturated
fats and so even when we eat a mixed fat diet, our tissues with aging tend to load up on
the unsaturated. And the N-3 fats, the double bonds are farther from the acidic end, which
is what is handled biologically. And the acid end protects against oxidation. So the N-3
fats are more unstable in the presence of oxygen and so we don't store so much of those.
So with aging, our bloodstream, every time we're slightly stressed, our bloodstream
gets a fairly high concentration of N-6 fatty acids, which produce the toxic prostaglandins
that produce brain cell damage and inflammation and so on. And so if you take a meal of fish
or eat some fish oil, these oxidize very quickly and form compounds that will interfere with
the formation of prostaglandins. But in doing that, they're also suppressing the immune
system, but you get temporary relief to the extent that you're overloaded with the most
toxic N-6 fatty acids. So people experience some relief of inflammation when they take
fish oil, but in the long run, that's doing its own damage because it's so highly oxidizable.
In some experiments, the N-3 fats increased the metastatic spread of cancer cells.
Okay, did you get that, Carla?
Yes, I did. What would you recommend for as something that would, a substance that we
take that would promote healthy brain function or maybe even the regeneration of brain cells
and that, and fish oil?
Well I know that Dr. Peet definitely espouses the saturated fats as very protective, both
stabilizing cell membranes, being cardiovascularly protective, which is not what you'll hear
if you read the newspapers or magazine articles. But in terms of anti-inflammatory effects,
the saturated fats are definitely better in the brain function for stabilizing the membranes
and the saturated fats are certainly going to be the protective compounds. So coconut
oil, palm oil, butter, animal fat, and I've got to say a caveat to add to the statement
animal fat, you need to make sure the animal is certified organic, otherwise most of all
the residues of whatever pesticides or hormones or antibiotics they're treated with will wind
up in their fat, so you don't want to eat the fat of a non-organic animal.
But it depends on what the animals were being fed. Chickens are highly polyunsaturated,
pork for the last 50 years has been very full of polyunsaturated fats, even though lots
of science papers are treating lard as a saturated fat with 35% or so of PUFA in it, it's definitely
a risky fat.
Okay, so we do have three more callers on the line Dr. Pete, so thank you for your call
and let's move on to the next callers. So next one, you're on the air, where are you
from? Hello?
Is it me?
Yeah, you're on the air, where are you from?
Alright, up on Bell Springs.
Okay, very local. What's your question?
Okay, my question has to do with breast health and I know you're going to address that in
the program. What I would like to ask is that you address urea in reference to breast health
and particularly fibroids.
Okay, Dr. Pete, did you hear that? The reference to breast health and fibroids and the benefits
of urea?
I don't know of any particular treatments or programs for those with urea, but the diet
that favors the formation of urea rather than its antithesis nitric oxide, it happens that
the amino acid arginine can either form nitric oxide or urea and irritants, anything toxic
tends to shift it away from forming urea and going to nitric oxide. So avoiding the polyunsaturated
fats helps you maintain the proper amount of urea formation.
Okay, because Carlo, I don't know if you heard the earlier part of the show, I wasn't making
a reference or we weren't making references to urea specifically to breast health, but
we were, if we have the time here, otherwise we'll do it next month, we were going to get
into the common lies and mistakes that people are told about polyunsaturated oils and estrogen
and its supposed health benefits because there's plenty of scientific evidence to show that
estrogen is actually very damaging and that in terms of breast health and fibroids, I
know Dr. Pete, you would agree that estrogen is probably one of the main contributory factors
for fibroids?
Oh, oh definitely. Low thyroid causes the ratio of estrogen to progesterone and androgens
to be very high and both endometriosis, uterine fibroids and also breast fibrocystic disease,
all of these go with high estrogen, low progesterone and low thyroid function.
Okay, Carla, does that help in any way?
Yeah, it does. Thank you very much. I just was curious because cancers are being talked
about in relation to urea, if it also would then be translated to breast as well. So that
did answer it. Thank you so much.
Okay, you're welcome. So like I said, if we get a chance here, we'll get into the estrogen,
negative effects of estrogen and talk about isoflavones, but we do have a couple more
callers. So let's take this next caller. Caller, you're on the air and where are you from?
Hello?
Hi, you're on the air. Where are you from?
Hi, I'm over the hill by Alder Point.
Okay, and what's your question?
About insomnia. I take three blood pressure pills for high blood pressure and I sleep
maybe one to two hours and it takes me an hour to two hours to go back to sleep and
I'm just exhausted. I can't nap. I get anxiety attacks. I have shingles and I heard that
tart cherry juice, one to two ounces, helps sleep.
What was that again? What was that product again?
Tart cherry juice. I heard that on Dr. Oz. I haven't tried that. But everything I've
tried over the counter, medications, nothing helps.
No, I bet. Dr. Pete, you're going to say this is a...
I'm exhausted. I'll take my answer off the air that way I could write.
Sure. Okay, Dr. Pete, it's probably an over adrenaline situation, but how would you best
describe to this lady what she could do to get some sleep?
Having a test for thyroid function is important.
Oh, my sister has grave disease.
There you go. Go ahead, Dr. Pete.
Blood sugar is always a problem at night. The effect of daylight is to maintain efficient
oxidative metabolism and just 15 minutes of darkness is enough to lower the efficiency
of mitochondrial respiration. And so keeping very bright lights right up until bedtime
will minimize the fall of blood sugar. But having a carbohydrate meal late in the afternoon
or before bed, a glass of orange juice or milk with honey, sometimes just the dose of
sugar is enough to put you to sleep for an hour and a half or two hours. It takes time
for the liver to start storing glycogen. So it's good to have another glass ready for
when you wake up, have another dose of orange juice or milk and sugar. And salty things,
salty snacks at bedtime help to stabilize the blood sugar and energy production. So
like milk and maybe salty tortilla chips or puffed pork rinds, something, a salty snack
as well as a...
Even with high blood pressure, you think it's okay?
It's...
They've got it so low now.
You have to take into account what drug you're taking. But vitamin K is a very important
nutrient for regulating blood sugar, blood calcium and blood pressure. I've known people
who in a week or two lowered their blood pressure by 100 points, 240 to 140 systolic pressure.
Really from taking vitamin K?
Yeah. And so you have to, if you're already at normal blood pressure, you have to be cautious
and watch what's happening if you supplement large amounts of vitamin K.
How much would I take in milligrams? I don't know how much.
Five or 10 milligrams is a pretty safe dose.
How about vitamin D?
That's essential. If you aren't getting regular sunlight or using a D supplement, you probably
should have a blood test because low blood vitamin D, down around 20 on the scale should
be around 50 points. Between 30 and 100 is the normal range.
Okay. I'm sorry to interrupt. So just get a complete blood panel like?
Well, you have to ask for a specific vitamin D3 test.
Oh, vitamin D3 test. Okay.
And you don't want the activated vitamin D. It's the 25-hydroxycholecalciferol that you
want to measure. And that's very important. Both vitamin K and vitamin D prevent the excitatory
excess. And so it's essential to have your calcium regulated.
Can I ask you how I could speak to you? Do you have an office in Garberville?
Dr. Peete doesn't have an office in Garberville, but I do. If you wanted to, you could consult
with me at any point in time. You can just contact me Monday through Friday. I'll give
the number out at the end of the show. Okay, great. Thank you very, very much.
You're welcome. I appreciate your time.
You're welcome. Bye-bye.
Thank you. We do have two more callers on the air, so let's take the next caller.
Caller, you're on the air. Hello.
And where are you from? Hi, you're on the air.
Okay, I've got a couple of questions. One, I want to know about this urea, if it's so
good for cancer, and you say even cancer of the liver, I know liver cancer is very difficult
to treat. Why is this not a more popular treatment?
Yeah, it's a good question. I don't know. I don't want to say it's conspiracy, but I
think sometimes simple things get buried. And I think the truth of that is that when
things are so simple, they'll quickly get buried under a paper of a pile of papers that
are supporting the latest and greatest treatments. And as we know, there is no real treatment
for cancer. I think the cancer industry probably has one of the worst track records going for
cures. Well, it seems like, I mean, I have a friend
that got over cancer with radiation and chemotherapy, and she beat it, and she had a couple of large
tumors. So these things do work, maybe not always 100%, but more than they used to.
Yeah, I think there's lots of things to look out for, though, in terms of relapses with
initial treatments. But that's not to say that everybody gets a relapse and ends up
with cancer down the line. The five-year mortality for cancers are post-operative are pretty
poor in most cases. There are not many cancers that are that truly resolved.
Well, they get a little time anyway. If they don't do anything, they die.
Well, yeah. Now, the other thing I wanted to know is I
was taking something called glucosamine MSM for joint flexibility. What is this MSM? Do
you know what that is? They said it was a sulfur that your cells needed or something.
Is that important to take as a supplement? It is a sulfur compound, but I don't know
what it is, Dr. Peet. Dr. Peet, what do you have to say about MSM?
I think you should be very cautious and read some of the actual research articles on PubMed
about it. And the glucosamine, which was the...
Glucosamine with MSM.
The glucosamine is suspected of being a factor in creating diabetes if you take too much
of it for too long.
But what about the MSM? What is the problem with that?
It can be toxic in itself.
Toxic? How? I mean, and how much would that be?
Because what they told me was that it was something that your cells needed to be healthy.
No, cells definitely don't need it, but it's tolerated in fairly large amounts, but it
can also be toxic in those amounts.
Okay, so what are the amounts that are safe?
Well, I wouldn't...
You don't know? Okay, the other one thing I want to ask you, you know, you were saying
that fish oil is not so good, but I heard that fish oil, like omega-3s, are really good
for the heart. What do you think about that?
No, the studies have all ended up pretty negative.
What studies are negative?
When it's used for a short period, you can do things like lowering cholesterol and lowering
blood pressure, but it ends up with the toxic immune suppressive effects.
And it also has thyroid suppressive effects, very negatively impacting the energy supply
and the energy production.
Are you saying that the omega-3 lowers the thyroid function?
Yeah, and it's specifically thyrotoxic.
Really?
Yeah.
I have to take thyroid.
Yeah. Okay, so they produce the byproducts of these polyunsaturated oils. The lipofruscine
is one of the main thyroid suppressive compounds. And indeed, as Dr. Peet says, whilst in the
short term, somebody who has plaque psoriasis may benefit from it, the actual reason for
it is that the immune system itself is being impacted negatively and suppressed. And so
therefore there's not such excitation going on with rapid cell turnover in the immune
system.
Well, why is it so popular?
It's so popular because it's an extremely profitable product.
Like margarine?
It's a waste product.
Okay, and one more thing. Sesame tahini, that's made out of sesame seeds. Is that...
The same problem. It's a liquid oil. It's polyunsaturated. People don't get oil out
of nuts and seeds. It just doesn't happen. It's very small amounts. And so to consume
either sesame or Brazil nut or peanut or whatever nut oil is consuming a lot of the product
that you'd never normally get exposed to. And this is the whole rationale behind understanding
the negative impacts of these oils, is that...
So you don't think that sesame seeds have good stuff for you?
No, no, none of it. It's a very, very rancid, very easily rancified. They're extremely quickly
oxidized and turn into a sticky goo on the top of the jar. Anybody can take the top of
a canola jar or a fish oil bottle and you'll see how sticky it is. And that's because your
oil has been so quickly oxidized. In your body, that same thing happens and that oxidative
damage is extremely damaging.
Well, you can tell if it's rancid by the smell and the taste. It's very obvious.
Coconut oil does not go rancid. You could keep coconut oil for years and it will not
go rancid because it's so stable.
Are any nuts good for you?
Not really. Well, I think one of the only nuts maybe that might be worth a mention perhaps
is the Mauna Loa produced macadamia nuts.
Well, I was seeing on Dr. Oz that he said the cashew nuts were very healthy.
Yeah, no, unfortunately not.
Okay, okay. And what about CoQ10? Is that a good thing to take?
Dr. Peay, what do you have to say about CoQ10? I think you would take it.
I think it is good. It works with vitamin K to stabilize energy production.
Okay, does vitamin K help vitamin D work better?
Yeah, they both do different things, but they regulate calcium and vitamin K has that extra
function of stabilizing energy and brain chemistry.
All right, well, thank you very much. Bye-bye.
Thank you. We do have another caller, but if we can get this next caller, next question
asked and answered in a couple of minutes, Dr. Peay, that would be great. Go ahead, caller.
You're on the air. Where are you from?
Yes, hello. I'm calling from Bellevue, Idaho, and I'd like to know, you've discussed how
it takes four years to change the saturated fat ratio of your cells to a healthy range.
What if you're overweight? Then does it take longer to achieve this healthy ratio?
Yeah.
Yeah. So, okay, Dr. Peay, how would you suggest that somebody who was, I don't know this person
is, but if somebody was obese, for example, and they had all this excess body fat, which
naturally would be pretty highly unsaturated, how would they go about changing the composition
of their fat, not only by changing their diet to only include saturated fats, but how would
they gently exercise and lose weight to do that safely?
Having your thyroid at the right level is one thing, and supplementing vitamin E, because
when you're losing stored fat, it's going to travel through your bloodstream, and so
you want to have a steady supply of vitamin E coming in. Maybe 50 milligrams a day would
help. And a lot of fruit, orange juice, for example, has safe antioxidants besides vitamin
C that protect your blood vessels as the fat is being removed. And keeping your temperature
steady at 98.6 or close to it during the daytime keeps you burning your energy productively
rather than destructively.
Okay. So, Carla, there you go.
Well, then, as long as you retain the weight, then you still have an issue, then, with unsaturated
fat cells. Is that correct?
Yeah. When you lose the fat, you're going to expose your tissues to that polyunsaturated
fat that is in storage. And if you keep your liver energetic with a good diet, enough protein,
80 to 100 grams a day of good protein, and keep your thyroid function up, your liver
will be able to dispose of some of that unsaturated fat as a toxin without having to oxidize it.
So, gentle exercise, keep yourself warm, make sure your thyroid function is working well,
consume saturated fats, lots of OJ and other fructose-containing fruits and/or fruit juices
to speed up your metabolism, and then coconut oil, obviously, as a thermogenic alternative
to polyunsaturated fat.
Okay. Well, unfortunately, that's all we have time for. So, thanks to those people that
have called in. I just want to give people a reminder of how they can find more of Dr.
Pete's reference material on site. Thank you so much for joining us, Dr. Pete.
Okay. Thank you.
Okay. So, on the internet, www.raypeat.com, R-A-Y-P-E-A-T.com, lots of scholarly articles,
fully referenced research material. It's not hocus-pocus. It's all research material. So,
just like Dr. Danopoulos with the stunning results with liver cancer as well as skin
cancers and ocular cancers, there's lots of alternatives out there, and it's not wacko.
It's just unfortunate it's not mainstream, but that's because it doesn't make too much
money, I suspect.
Anyway, for those of you who have joined us, thanks so much for tuning in. We'll be back
next month, third Friday of the month, from 7 till 8 p.m.
My name's Andrew Murray. We can be reached 1-888-WBM-ERB for consultations or further
questions Monday through Friday. Good night.
*Twitch notification*